The Project Gutenberg eBook of The life watch
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The life watch

Author: Lester Del Rey

Release date: July 22, 2024 [eBook #74095]

Language: English

Original publication: New York, NY: King-Size Publications, Inc, 1954

Credits: Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LIFE WATCH ***





                            The Life Watch

                           By Lester del Rey

                    Norden could not trust his own
                    darkly terrifying thoughts and
                     impulses. Yet he kept a life
                   watch over the whole human race.

           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
                  Fantastic Universe September 1954.
         Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]

    _The spread of an alien culture across wide wastes of space, with
    its almost inevitable, remorseless destruction of human life, has
    chilling implications even for the literal-minded. When mirrored
    in the bright, adventurous prism of modern science fiction it
    offers unparalleled opportunities to a writer of Lester del Rey's
    stature. We're sure you'll agree that he's scored a triumph in this
    brilliantly imaginative yarn._


Norden could feel dread knot his mind as he watched the tiny blue speck
against the black sky. It was a senseless, unnatural emotion, and he
knew it. The searing blue point of flame could only mean that the
approaching ship was powered by atomic rockets--and the Aliens drove
their ships in some mysterious manner, without any kind of reaction
motor. The object coming down toward the tiny asteroid could only be of
terrestrial origin, powered by a human device.

Yet his fear grew worse. He shook his head, wondering again how close
to insanity he had drifted. His eyes darted sideways, scanning the
wreckage that had been his laboratory, then back to the descending
ship. Mercifully, he couldn't remember most of what had happened. He
only knew that it had been sufficiently bad to drive any human close to
the brink of madness. It would have been torturing enough to be left
alone for days in a wrecked and airless dome while the oxygen tanks
were used up, one by one. But to have seen Hardwick's face when the
Aliens caught him....

He tried to stop thinking about it. The Aliens were only vague shadows
in his mind now--the picture of what must have happened as remote and
unreal as his memories of struggling free from the wreckage.

Somehow, he'd survived against incredible odds, undetected by the
Aliens. He'd dug out the emergency transmitter and tried signaling for
help. Now apparently, before the last tank of oxygen on his back had
been used up completely, rescue had come. He should have been ecstatic
with relief.

The fear remained, some twisted reaction left over from the days of
terror and hopelessness. He lifted his hands and studied them. They
were steady enough; the fear was having no outward effect.

Already the ship was close enough for Norden to see glints of weak
sunlight reflecting from its metal hull. The pilot must have been one
of the best, for there was no wavering, or side-jetting to correct the
course. It was coming straight down, slowing to a drift. As Norden
stared the exhaust hit the jagged surface of the asteroid and splashed
out. Abruptly it cut off, and the ship dropped slowly the few remaining
feet, to come to rest less than half a mile away.

Norden knew he should start running toward it, and stood up. But he
couldn't give the order to his legs. He stared toward the ship, then
back at the ruins. Maybe there was something he should take with him.
He had air enough for another hour. Surely there was no need to rush
things. Men would be coming here for him. And it wouldn't do any harm
to put off meeting them a little longer. He didn't want to be subjected
to their questions yet.

He started hesitantly toward the ship, trying to force himself to move.
Men began to emerge and head toward him. He dropped onto a mess that
had been a super-speed tape instrument recorder and waited.

His mind was running a rat-race inside his head, and there was a
gnawing tension. He cleared his throat and reached for the switch on
his suit radio. The men were almost up to him. He got to his feet
again, fumbling frantically with the little switch.

Then the harsh beam of a flashlight picked him out, and a gruff voice
sounded in his headphones. "Dr. William Norden?"

He nodded, and rehearsed words stumbled to his lips. "Thank God, you
got here! I was afraid the transmitter wouldn't work!"

There was a hint of something like kindness in the voice. "Take it
easy, Dr. Norden! It did work, and we're here. What happened to
Hardwick? Where is he?"

"Dead, I hope," Norden answered. "The Aliens got him!" He shuddered,
glancing at the spot where it had happened.

The man wearing general's insignia nodded, while sickness spread over
his face. He motioned to one of the others. "Get pics of the wreck, and
collect any records you can. The rest of you give Dr. Norden a hand.
And hurry! They may have spotted us already!"

The man with the camera went resolutely to work, flashing his shots
with a strobe light that blinked twenty-four times a second. Two others
began unrolling a stretcher.

Norden shook his head in feeble protest. "I can walk. And I've already
collected Hardwick's notebooks."

They set a pace closer to a run than a walk, bouncing ludicrously in
the slight gravity of the asteroid. Norden kept up with them easily
enough, trying to make sense of his reactions. Most of the fear and
tension had left him, as if he'd passed over some hurdles, and was
experiencing a resurge of confidence. The military efficiency of his
rescuers had also a bracing effect. Maybe he hadn't believed in his
rescue until now. But he did feel better, though his eyes went on
studying the others cautiously, as if looking for any reaction that
might inadvertently betray them.

They reached the ship, and began pulling themselves through its
flexible hatch. The leader jerked off his helmet and suit, exposing
iron grey hair that contrasted rather startlingly with an almost
youthful face. It was the face of a man who hadn't let himself grow
soft during the years before the Aliens came. He swung toward Norden.

"How much gravity can you take, Dr. Norden?" he asked. "Six g's?"

"In a hammock, for a few minutes," Norden answered.

They were already heading up the ladder toward the nose of the ship.
The general ripped a sling out of its case when they reached the
control cabin. He snapped it to its lugs, motioned Norden onto it,
and bound him in place in less time than he could have ordered the
job done. Then he dropped to his own control seat. "Six g's for five
minutes, then hold her at four until I order. Up ship!"

Norden didn't black out during the first five minutes, though the
pressure was enough to drive the sling to its bottom mark and make its
cables groan in protest. As they switched from six to four gravities,
the pressure eased a little.

An hour crept by, and another. When the general finally ordered the
drive cut, Norden estimated that they had been under acceleration for
nearly five hours and were doing about two million miles an hour.
Either the general was crazy, or the ship must have been stocked to the
last bin with fuel. They were making more than five times the normal
emergency speed.

Then the leader came back and began releasing Norden. "Sorry to give
you such a beating after what you've been through, Dr. Norden," he
said. "But we'll still be lucky if we have enough speed to slip past
their detectors before they can trace our orbit and overhaul us.
They've been getting worse lately."

He sighed, and his lips thinned. Then he shrugged. "We'll talk about
that later. Right now you need food." He managed a smile. "I don't have
to tell you that the doctor and psychiatrist will be biting their nails
to give you the works. Oh, I'm Armsworth."

Norden felt the chill touch his mind again. He'd expected a doctor, and
had been bracing himself for one. But the _psychiatrist_.... He forced
calmness into his voice. "I could eat a horse!"

"You probably will," Armsworth told him with quick, automatic humor.
"This is the Space Service!"

The little cabin to which Armsworth took him was crowded alarmingly.
There were the two men waiting for him, with their specialized
equipment. In addition, there was the forbidding bulk of a large
recording machine ready to take down every word he uttered.
He acknowledged the introductions, and downed a glass of some
over-sweetened fruit juice which the doctor held out.

"It will get you ready for some real food," the physician told him.
"Would you like to clean up while I look you over, before the main
course comes?"

Norden seized on the chance. It would give him something to do beside
tormenting himself, and it was obvious he needed grooming. His dark
hair was matted, his face marked with dirt that had sunk into every
wrinkle and line, and there was a thick growth of stubble on his skin.
It was a thin, fairly good-looking face, as unfamiliar as if he'd just
seen it for the first time in a photograph. He seemed to have forgotten
_himself_, even.

While he washed and shaved, the doctor was busy. But the examination
was less detailed than he had expected it would be, and finally the man
stood back, nodding.

"For someone nearing forty, you're in excellent shape, Dr. Norden," he
said. "You had a rough time of it, but I was sure you'd be all right
physically when I heard you hadn't blacked out under high acceleration.
Okay, go ahead and eat."

He moved toward the door, but showed no sign of leaving until his
curiosity could be satisfied.

Norden had to force himself to eat, for he had no apparent appetite.
The psychiatrist leaned forward casually, watching him. "Would you like
to tell us about it, Dr. Norden?" he asked. "Precisely what happened to
Hardwick?"

Norden shook his head, while the tension mounted again. The man would
be on the alert for hidden meanings in his words, and he wasn't quite
ready for that. Yet he was afraid to risk putting it off. "I'm not sure
I can tell much. I--well, everything's pretty foggy. A lot of it I
can't remember at all."

"Partial amnesia is fairly common," the psychiatrist said reassuringly.
"In fact, everyone has touches of it. Try going back a bit--say to your
childhood--to give you a running start. We've got plenty of time."

Norden had little interest in his childhood, and he skimmed over it
with a few words. He'd done nothing unusual until he'd drifted into the
new investigation of radiation outside the electromagnetic spectrum in
his post-graduate college work. Then he'd suddenly developed, caught
fire, and become something of a genius.

He was the first man ever to prove there was more than theory involved.
He'd been called to Mars for the Widmark Interplanetary Award for his
brilliant demonstration of protogravity after he'd floated two ounces
of lead with a hundred thousand dollars worth of equipment that used
twenty kilowatts of power.

In fifteen years at Mars Institute, he'd discovered four new types of
extraspectral radiation, become a full professor, and had _almost_
discovered how to harness nuclear binding energy.

Then the Aliens had come. They had appeared abruptly near Pluto,
apparently coming at a speed greater than that of light, in strange
globular ships that defied radar detection. Without provocation or
mercy, they had sought out and destroyed every settlement between Pluto
and Saturn, and had begun moving inward, systematically destroying all
life in their path.

Nobody had ever seen an Alien--they invariably exploded to dust before
they could be captured--but the horror of their senseless brutality was
revealed in the hideous human corpses they left behind them.

Norden had been drafted while there was still optimism. Men could build
a hundred ships to the Aliens' one, equally radar-proof, free from
danger of magnetic or electronic detection, and nearly invisible in
space. In anything like an even battle, men were certain to win. But
they soon discovered it wasn't an even battle.

The Aliens had some means of detecting human ships accurately at
distances of millions of miles, and blasting them with self-guided
torpedoes, while remaining undetected themselves. And behind the
torpedoes would come the dark globular ships to spray the wreckage with
some force that left every cell utterly lifeless.

Hardwick had been a quasi-scientist, mixed up with certain weird cults,
who maintained a private laboratory on an asteroid near Jupiter's
orbit. And in the desperation that followed the first foolish optimism,
his theory that the Aliens could detect life itself, or the presence of
the questionable mitogenetic rays that were supposed to radiate from
nerve endings, was actually taken seriously.

Surprisingly, the tests indicated that remote-controlled ships which
had been completely sterilized went undetected, while ships carrying
rats or other life were blasted. Norden, as the expert on all strange
radiation, had been sent to work with Hardwick in attempting to devise
a screen for the hypothetical life radiation.

He never learned whether Hardwick was a wild genius, or an even wilder
lunatic. While he was wearing Hardwick's improvised shield during one
of the attempts to test it, the Aliens had landed and broken in.

"What did they look like?" the psychologist asked casually--too
casually, Norden felt.

"Well, they--" He frowned, trying to remember, but a clamp came down
over his mind. "I--I can't remember. And they did--something--to
Hardwick. I--I...."

Armsworth brushed the other question aside. "Never mind. You were
wearing Hardwick's shield. Didn't they notice you?"

Norden shook his head doubtfully. "No, I don't think they did. It's all
horribly blurred. I think I jumped for the spacesuit locker when they
breeched the airlock on the dome. I must have gotten into a suit, and
been hidden by the locker door. And I must have run out after they took
Hardwick away."

At least he hadn't been hurt when the Alien bomb ruined the dome. He'd
dug out the transmitter, sent the message, and then had spent the
agony of waiting in trying to decipher the cryptic code in Hardwick's
notebooks.

They went over his account several times, but he could tell then little
more. Then there were tests, some of which he could understand and
answer without trouble, while others left him taut with uncertainty and
etched worried lines into the face of the psychiatrist. But at last the
man nodded doubtfully.

"I think he'll do," he reported hesitantly to Armsworth. "A traumatic
experience always leaves scars, but...."

"But or no he'd better do," Armsworth said gruffly. "No wonder they
ordered us out to pick him up! He was within fifty feet of the Aliens,
and they didn't locate him! Dr. Norden, if that shield works and you
can duplicate it, you'll be the most valuable man alive!"

"And the tiredest and sleepiest," Norden suggested. His eyes narrowed,
and his mind darted about, seeking some sign of the wrong reaction.
Then he relaxed as the doctor and psychiatrist picked up their
equipment and went out with advice he hardly heard. Armsworth lingered,
and Norden searched about in his mind for what seemed to be a safe
question.

"How long until we reach Mars, general?" he asked.

"We don't!" Armstrong's voice was suddenly thick and bitter. "We've
abandoned Mars. The Aliens have moved inward. We--oh, hell, we'll reach
our new laboratory on the Moon base in about four days! And you'd
better start praying that shield works, or my value to you won't be
worth salvaging."

He shrugged abruptly and left, closing the cabin door quietly behind
him. Norden slumped down on the bed, not bothering to remove his
clothes.

Automatically, he lifted his arms until both his hands were pressing
against the nape of his neck, settled into a comfortable position
against the automatic straps, and began reviewing all the events of his
rescue carefully. And bit by bit, the worry in his head quieted. He'd
gotten away with it. What "it" was, he didn't know or even remotely
suspect, but the horrible tension was gone.


                                  II

It was a short-lived respite, for no sooner had Norden reached the base
on the Moon where the frenzied activity of the new laboratories went on
than the tension returned.

The taped interviews had been signaled ahead, together with Hardwick's
notebooks and Norden's suggested list of equipment. Apparently, the
information on him hadn't been satisfactory. He was rushed to a small,
rectangular room where three men mumbled and complained unhappily as he
was given tests that served no purpose that he could see.

And finally, he was forced to wait in the corridor outside for nearly
an hour while the three conferred, before he was given an envelope of
papers and led to the office of General Miles, head of the entire Moon
base.

Miles skimmed through the reports and reached for the hushed phone. He
was a man of indeterminate age, with a young voice and old eyes. There
was a curious grace to his gaunt body, and a friendly smile on his
rough-hewn face, despite telltale marks of exhaustion.

Norden watched him tensely, but his reactions were not revealing until
he turned back abruptly, and extended his hand.

"You're in, Dr. Norden," he said. "What you urgently need is rest.
You've had a devil of a time of it, and you show it. But we can't
afford to let you go." He nodded grimly. "You're no more psychotic
than I am, since you're able to work. And we need your work. The last
settlement on Mars was just wiped out before we could evacuate it.
Hardwick's notes are pure gobbledegook, so we _have_ to depend on your
help. Come on."

He stood up and led Norden through a narrow door, and into a tunnel
that connected GHQ with a large Quonset-type building to the south.

"We've secured everything we could for you," he explained. "We even
got you an assistant, and the exclusive use of our largest computer."
He threw open the door to the laboratory, and gestured. "It's _all
yours_. I'll be around from time to time, but if you need anything
extra-special don't hesitate to ask for it. All of our work is
important but you have top priority here."

Norden closed the door firmly as the general left, studying the
equipment--more than he'd dreamed they could provide. To them, he was
probably off balance. But at the moment, he was convinced they would
have given top priority to a man who could do the Indian rope trick. It
seemed like a careless way of running things, particularly since they
hadn't put a guard over him, or hinted at a penalty for failure.

He moved back through the laboratory, studying the equipment. Again,
there was the disturbing sense that his experience had blanked out
whole sections of his mind, until he had to puzzle out apparatus he
must have used a thousand times. But it was still obvious that the
laboratory had everything he could possibly want--and more.

He wandered back and around the big computer, and almost collided with
a small, brown-haired girl in a lab smock who looked up at him with
eager interest, her slender hands busy with the keyboard.

"Dr. Norden? I'm Pat Miles, your assistant. I hope you won't let the
fact that the general is my father disturb you. I had three years of
extraspectral math and paraphysics at Chitec, and I'm a registered
computer operator in my own right, grade one." She smiled at him.

He knew at once that she was the guard placed over him--an extremely
attractive guard who would keep the general informed as to his
progress. But a known factor was always better than an unknown one. He
offered her his hand, and she took it quickly.

"Glad to have you, Pat," he said. "But until I can decode Hardwick's
notes from what little I've learned of them, there won't be much to do."

He'd decided that it was a reasonable job, and one which would take up
enough time for him to orient himself. After that... his mind skidded
off the subject.

She pointed to the work table by the machine where the notes lay spread
out. "I've been systematizing it already. If you can supply half a
dozen keys, the computer should be able to translate the rest."

It rocked him for a second. He hadn't thought of the possibility, and
it meant an end to stalling, long before he could be ready. But there
was nothing he could do about it. He picked up the notes, and began
pointing out the few phrases he had learned, together with the only
clear memory he seemed to have of his time with Hardwick.

"The last page covers the final test," he told her. "Hardwick had some
cockroaches and mosquitoes left over from an experiment with various
vermin, and he put them in a glass case. I stood at one side with
the screen he'd made on me, and he stood on the other. Apparently he
figured the things could sense the human aura, and the roaches should
move toward my absence of one, the mosquitoes toward him for food. But
there was no statistical evidence of its success."

She began feeding information to the machine, and reeling out the
results, checking with him. At first, he begrudged the work, but then
he found his interest quickening in the puzzle and its untangling. She
was good at the work, though she found it hard to believe that the
cult-inspired nonsense could be a correct translation.

He began trying to anticipate the problems of her programming, and
to scan the results, cross-checking to reduce errors from his own
confusion.

Finally she nodded. "That's it, Bill. The computer can cross-check the
rest itself. All I've got to do is cut the notes on a tape, and feed
them in. Why don't you go to lunch while I'm doing it? Dad has you
scheduled for his table, down in the GHQ basement cafeteria."

"What about you?" he asked.

She shook her head. "I want to finish this. Go on, don't keep Dad
waiting."

Norden found most of the seats filled, but Miles saw him and waved him
over. There was a round of introductions to names that were famous in
their fields--famous enough for even Norden to recognize, though he'd
stuck pretty closely to his own specialty.

"How's it shaping up?" Miles wanted to know.

"We should have the notes decoded tonight," Norden told him. "After
that, it's a matter of how useful they'll be."

Miles grunted unhappily. "They'd better offer a more promising lead
than the others we've had. And soon! At this rate, in two more weeks at
most, the Aliens will be taking over the Moon--and if that happens, we
may as well stay here waiting for them."

He turned to the head psychologist, while Norden was still hunting for
the meaning of the implied threat he thought he could reed into the
words. "Jim, what about Enfield?"

"No dice," the psychologist answered. "He's obsessed with
xenophobia--he hates the Aliens for breakfast, lunch and between meals.
I can't treat him here. Of course, after what happened to his wife...."

Miles put his fork down and faced the group, but his eyes were on
Norden. His words had the ring of an often-delivered but still vital
lecture. "Damn it, we can't afford hatred. Maybe the mobs need it to
keep them going. But we have serious things to do that take sound
judgment. Why not hate disease germs or any other natural enemy?"

His voice hardened. "They don't kill for the pure love of evil. They're
intelligent beings, doing what they believe _has_ to be done. I think
they're wrong, and I can't understand them--though I wish I could. I
consider poisoning bedbugs a wise move, though no intelligent bedbug
would agree with me. This expedition of theirs would be a major job
for any trace, and they're going at it just as we would--if we had to
exterminate the boll weevil.

"Emotions haven't a thing to do with it. We're in a battle for raw
survival, and we haven't the time to indulge our animal emotions.
It's a scientific problem that has to be solved for our lives--like a
plague."

Norden added another intangible to the puzzle--either Miles was setting
a trap for him, or it was hard to understand how he'd gotten the five
stars on his insignia. An enemy was an enemy! He decided on silence
as the best course, and was glad when the others began to leave. He
watched them moving out, shocked again at the pretense that was going
on. Did they really think war to the death was a game?

He started to follow, then hesitated, swayed by a sudden impulse.
Surely it could do no harm. He located one of the waiters and asked
for a package of food to take to Pat. To his relief, the man showed no
surprise, and he soon had a bag in his hand.

Pat was still sitting at the machine. She took the food with a pleased
smile that told him he'd done the right thing. "Why so glum?" she asked.

"Frankly, I'm puzzled," he told her. On a sudden impulse, he mentioned
the lecture and how it had disturbed him.

"Dad!" She smiled, then laughed outright. "He always talks like that to
a new man. Bill, did you ever see a little boy fighting a bigger one,
wading in, crying, whimpering, but so mad he couldn't stop--couldn't
even see where he was hitting? That's hate-fighting. And it's
senseless, because the other side may be just as right. Professional
fighters don't really hate--they simply do everything they can to win,
coldly and scientifically."

She touched his arm. "Bill, be sensible. You act as if we _couldn't_
win."

"What makes you think we can?"

"The computer thinks so. I tried it. We'll win because we know how
to be efficient. We'll experiment a bit, because we don't have a set
pattern--because we've kept individuality. The Aliens act like a preset
machine. Like a crew killing pests.

"Start at the outside of a circle and exterminate inwards! Nonsense!
They should have hit Earth at once, even if they had to retrace their
steps a few times. But they aren't trying to find out whether we act
like the enemy they planned on. No--what's the proper way is the proper
way. A lot of our nations attempted that once--and look where they are
now."

He shook his head, not believing her, but it left him uncertain and
disturbed. The fact was that the enemy was closing the net--closing
it so fast he'd be a dead man in two weeks, if he couldn't find the
solution. As to hatred....

He shook his head, and went into his office. There were copies of his
own published works there, as well as magazines he hadn't yet seen. He
dropped down to fill in the flaws his memory had developed.

Paraphysics was tricky stuff. For a long time men had known no other
spectrum but the electromagnetic, running from heat up through cosmic
rays. When atomic particles moved from one energy level to another,
they produced quanta of energy in that spectrum, which was limited to
the speed of light.

The kinetogravitic spectrum began with gravity and moved up through
nuclear binding force toward some unknown band. Apparently it was the
product of the behavior of some sub-particle finer than any known, and
its speed of propagation was practically infinite. Other spectra were
being considered, but no order or logic had fitted yet.

He found an article by a Japanese scientist that suggested there might
be a spectrum related to the behavior of atoms in the molecule--with
crystals in some cases acting on one level due to the electron drift,
and on another due to atomic strains within the molecule. Colloids,
polymers and even the encephalograph waves were dragged in, but the
mathematics seemed sound enough.

Norden caught his breath, and began digging into the equation. The
third manipulation suggested that magnetism might somehow be involved,
and that would mean....

He couldn't dig the idea out. Just when it seemed about to open before
him, his mind shied away and drifted off to other things. He was still
working on it when Pat came in, and dropped a sheaf of papers on the
table. Strips of tape had been pasted together to form a crude book.

"The whole thing," she reported. "But most of it's nonsense. There's
a page or two about some secret asteroid where the survivors of the
fifth planet are waiting for men to mature before bringing the Great
Millenium--or pages where Hardwick worked on the numerology of your
name before he discovered your middle name had no H in it--or little
notes to himself about buying a gross of Martian sand lizards. I had
the machine go through it, strike out all meaningless matter, and come
up with this."

It was a clip of five sheets. Norden skimmed through them, and groaned.
The shield he had tested for Hardwick had been made of genuine mummy
cloth, ground mandrake and a glue filled with bat blood.

"Yet you _did_ live," Pat pointed out. "And he was right about their
being able to detect life. We sent out sterile neoprene balloons loaded
with live rabbits, and others with dead rabbits. Every balloon with the
live rabbits was blasted--and none with the dead animals. We could use
the same test to find out whether any one of those things worked--or
any combination of them."

"We'll have to," he decided. "And then it may have been the closet
instead of the shield--or an accident to their detector that saved me.
Pat, have they got some kind of library here?"

It was already quitting time, but she went with him while he persuaded
the library attendant to let him in, before the next shift came on.
Mummy cloth, it seemed, might become infused with a number of aromatic
preservatives, products from the mummy, and such.

It was ridiculous--but hardly more ridiculous than using the byproducts
of mold to cure disease must have seemed. Anything dealing with life
was slightly implausible. And when he phoned in the order for the
materials to Miles, there were no questions.

"Thanks, Pat," he told her after she'd shown him where his sleeping
quarters were located.

She shrugged. "Why? If we _don't_ find the answer, I'll be as dead as
you in a few weeks."

He shuddered, and then put it out of his mind. Worrying about death
wasn't decent, somehow. He found his bunk, stretched out with his hands
behind his neck, and tried to review the serious events of the day,
without the problem of hatred, over-efficiency, or Pat and her father.
He saved those to worry about in his mind after he rolled over on his
side, and gave up all ideas of sleeping.

Then abruptly there was a yell from down the hall, and lights snapped
on. Norden sprang out with the others, to see the outer lock click
shut. In the glare of the overhead lights, he could see a figure
running desperately for the edge of a further Quonset--running in the
airlessness of the exposed surface without a spacesuit!

More lights snapped on, and a guard in a suit came around the corner,
throwing up a rifle. There was a tiny spurt of flame from the weapon,
and the running man pitched forward. The guard started toward him just
as a few men began to dart out of the huts in hastily-donned spacesuits.

A greenish-yellow effulgence bloomed shockingly where the runner
had fallen, and the floor shook under Norden. The guard was thrown
backwards, and the others stumbled. When the explosion was over there
was no sign of the man who had run.

"Alien!" somebody muttered. "A damned Alien! They always blow up like
that before you can get near them! I've seen it out in space!"

And Norden remembered the bomb that had wrecked the dome on the
asteroid--a bomb that had flared up with the same greenish-yellow color.

Guards came up to drive the men back to their huts, but Norden seemed
to have high enough rating to stay for a while. He learned that one of
the workers was missing, and that it had been his badge which the Alien
had worn to enter the sleeping sections. Either the Alien had killed
and destroyed the worker for his clothing or else he had been the
worker!

And he had been discovered forcing the lock on the sub-section of the
hut where Norden had been sleeping!


                                  III

The invasion of the base by the Alien had shocked them all, and few
people had slept during the night. On his way to breakfast, Norden
could feel the attention that was riveted on him. To the others, he was
probably one of the most likely targets for whatever attack had been
intended. He'd wondered about it himself, sick with a feeling of close
disaster; but he could find no logical basis for the fear.

Miles waited until they had finished with their food, his own face a
study in grim anxiety. Then he stood up, and faced them. "No work this
morning," he announced. "There's going to be a fluoroscopic test of
every person on the base!"

Norden felt a wrench at his mind that left his thoughts spinning. He
caught himself, just as he heard a gasp from Armsworth, a few places
down. But Miles went on as if nothing had happened.

"The guards have already been checked. They'll lead us all down to the
explosive test chamber. We'll go in, one at a time, and stand on a
marked square. The fluoroscope results will show on a television screen
visible to all of us. If you pass, you'll go across the chamber to the
cleared rooms beyond.

"Any man resisting or proven non-human will be shot at once. The
Alien last night _looked_ human, but he didn't breathe oxygen, so
his internal structure must be different. However, if anyone wants
to declare that he's an Alien, he'll be treated as a prisoner of war
instead of a spy."

Nobody made such a declaration, and Miles nodded to the guards who
had filed in, while fear-ridden faces were still staring at their
neighbors. Norden wondered how long a confessed Alien would last before
the men tore him to bits. Discounting hate was fine at long range--but
not when the danger was at your elbow.

Miles and Pat went into the chamber first, with the expected
result--human skeletons and shadowy organs showing up on the screen.
Norden stared in fascination, while fear built up tensions inside him.

Armsworth passed in and found his position, with a face that was
somehow both taut and frozen. The guards took a look at the screen and
waved him on. He half staggered to the exit, his features distorted
with an emotion that was unreadable.

Norden tried to fight down his own panic. Surely it would be madness
to doubt the outcome. But a doubt began to throb in his mind. He could
remember so little. He'd thought the Aliens had never found him. But
if they had actually captured him, tampered with his mind, and turned
him back again, would he know it? Suppose he was an Alien--one given
a spurious, hypnotic belief he was Norden until the right signal to
become himself again....

It was ridiculous, absurd! But the speculations ran on in his tormented
mind. He didn't belong here. Men apparently took it for granted that
a confessed spy could keep his life--and Norden took it equally for
granted that death was the only answer. He didn't think like the rest
of them. There had been that week on the asteroid. His memories were
spotty....

"Dr. William Norden!" the speaker announced.

He shuddered convulsively. Then he caught himself, and forced his
reluctant legs to move. The door shut behind him, and ahead lay
the white square on which he was to stand. He approached the spot
automatically, bracing himself to face straight ahead toward the
fluoroscopic screen.

_Now!_ It was almost a physical voice in his head. And his mind seemed
to shift, to shout something down. _Not yet! Look!_

"Okay, Dr. Norden," the speaker said. His eyes flicked to the screen
where a human skeleton showed dimly.

Crazy, he told himself. Hagridden with fears no sane human mind could
have endured and retained its sanity. No wonder the psychologists had
been uncertain about him. Unbalanced--but human!

Pat smiled weakly at him as he entered the room beyond, to join
the ranks of the elect. Then they watched as their group passed
successfully, to give place to a number of rocket men from the freight
gang.

The sixth rocket man came through the door boldly enough--and suddenly
leaped toward the side of the chamber where another door was. His hands
were jolting at the locked barrier when the rifles sounded. A violent
blast of greenish-yellow explosion rocked the chamber and shook the
floors beyond. When it cleared, the Alien was dust and vapor, with
nothing that could be studied for evidence.

Two workers who had been standing in line in a building beyond broke
through the seal together, without waiting their turn, and headed with
desperate haste for the shelter of a nearby barracks. A rifle bullet
tore into one, and both exploded instantly.

By the time the rest had been proved safe in a testing ordeal as grim
as death, it was the hour for lunch--a shocked, silent interlude at
first. Then one of the men caught sight of a neighbor busily shaking
his fork, and glancing sideways to emphasize some point. A tiny gadget
appeared, and was concealed quickly under the steak on the man's plate.
Ten seconds later, when the man cut into the meat, there was a cowlike
bellow and the meat leaped six inches up, and two feet sideways. There
was a shout of laughter that grew into a roar, and everything was
suddenly normal again.

Norden shook his head. The incident appeared grotesque to him.
Fluoroscope or not, something was wrong with him. He couldn't have been
so different from other men before the ordeal on Hardwick's asteroid.
That ruined steak had cost a small fortune to transport from Earth,
and the man would lose valuable time while waiting for another to be
cooked. And yet, Norden could see that somehow it had been effective
therapy, had relieved an almost intolerable tension.

They spent the afternoon sending out the test "balloon" rockets with
the various elements of Hardwick's screen. On the way back to the
barracks, Norden noticed there were now six guards stationed about the
laboratory, two of whom instantly fell into step behind him. He had
been shifted to the dormitory over the Headquarters building, where
he would be in the least danger--and also have the least freedom from
observation!

But he forgot it the next day as the results of the tests came in.
The shields had been completely ineffective. Dead rabbits still were
unmolested, but live ones had been picked off in everything they had
sent out.

Miles accepted the result with a despairing shrug, but Pat was hit hard
by it. None of the other research teams seemed to be getting anywhere.
There was no way to detect Aliens, and no way to screen humans.

On the fourth day, when the last possible variation of Hardwick's
formula had proved useless, and the Aliens had moved their lines up to
fifty million miles from Earth's orbit, Pat was down early, re-checking
the translation the computer had made. Norden came in, saw the results,
and swore.

For three hours, he pored over the Japanese scientist's
mathematics--and as before, he found his mind reaching for something,
only to begin some useless side speculation that threw him off. It was
as if he had a censor in his mind telling him he could go no further.
He considered the grim prospect of ten days or more of life for
himself, and the men here, until the noonday signal sounded.

Somebody had put a new plastic glue on the handle of his knife and
fork, and it was fifteen minutes before he could locate a solvent that
removed it. Pat laughed at his plight along with the others. He checked
his anger, swallowed it--and suddenly realized that in a strange way,
the practical jest played on him was a mark of acceptance.

He went back to the laboratory trying to think of something ingenious
enough to enable him to live up to their queer code. An idea that had
nagged him tantalizingly, just below consciousness, nibbled again at
his mind, but he let it go. If he could fit a protogravity generator
under a plate....

And abruptly, he was digging for the complete set of Hardwick's notes,
and scanning the nonsense that the computer had declared meaningless.
He picked up the telephone and called the library. "Give me what you've
got on Martian sand lizards!"

Most of it was useless. They were typical low-grade Martian life, tiny
things covered with fur, but vaguely lizard-like. Then the significant
part came. "The females demonstrate a remarkable ability to locate the
rare males at extreme distances. Janiekowski found that a female with
all sense organs removed could locate a male at a distance of five
kilometers, even when the male was enclosed in an airtight box of
laminated copper and soundboard. No satisfactory explanation is known."

It _had_ to be some form of telepathy or sensitivity to the life forces
of the male lizards! He went over the work done with the creatures a
dozen times, and could find no other explanation. And suddenly his mind
was milling about, trying to slide away from it again.

"Taboo!" he muttered. "_Damn_ the taboo!" It was too late for a taboo
to interfere now, whatever the reasons behind it. And fortified by his
growing certainty that something had been done to him, it only served
to confirm the fact that he was on the right track at last.

Pat listened to his summary of what he'd found, and nodded hopeful
agreement. "A quick test! It's what we need, all right. We still may
not find the insulator for the shield, but we can run tests fast enough
to have a chance. Metals first, then the other broad classifications,
until something vital turns up. Bill, I guess this makes me, and the
computer look pretty silly. And after all the yelling I've done about
flexibility being needed, too. I hope some zoo or laboratory on Earth
has a collection of the little beasts."

It turned out that Harvard was well stocked as a result of a research
plan to rework Janiekowski's experiments. In less than five hours,
twelve females and two rare males were lying in front of Norden. They
looked like small lizards covered with chinchilla hair, and possessing
eight legs apiece. The females, with scant modesty, were trying busily
to break down the wall that kept them from the males.

Pat had already installed three television pickups and cages at various
distant points, doing the work herself to insure secrecy, and picking
places most difficult to break into. Now she came back to move the
females to their new homes, where they immediately began trying to
crawl toward the torpid males, as shown by the television screens. The
walls of their cages were equipped with pressure-measuring devices to
test the strength of their efforts.

The mummy cloth drew a complete blank, as did the bat's blood. But the
ground mandrake set the males to pawing at their cake with their triple
tongues out, trying to reach it, while the distant females went berserk.

Pat took the stuff away, snorting at them. "They'll die of frustration
in another minute. To them an active male seems to be a combination
billionaire, video star, and accomplished Cassanova in the art of love.
I guess I know how they feel."

He was getting better at reading her glances, and he frowned as her
eyes rested upon him. He liked Pat, but sometimes she--

She laughed. "Forget it, Bill. I was only ribbing you. You have about
as much romantic appeal to me as my grandfather."

It was ten minutes later before he realized what a typical masculine
_human_ reaction to such a remark would have been. He frowned, while
his mind chilled at the implications. How could he doubt any longer
that the Aliens had caught him and done something to him--something
drastic? He wasn't quite human, despite what the bones of his body had
seemed to confirm.

And that could only mean that Hardwick's shield had never worked. He
stopped short, and then reconsidered. The difficulty he had forcing his
mind to think about tests for the lizards still spelled a taboo in his
mind--and that indicated there might be a shield. It left him exactly
where he was, except for the problem of what the Aliens wanted. If he
could solve that, and defeat it....

Nothing they tried gave any positive result, though Pat thought that
the variation in the female activity had been slightly more than normal
when they'd tried the potassium salt solution around the males. They
gave up late, and Norden went back to his bunk, and to the familiar
pattern of lulling himself into a semi-conscious condition by the
ritual of reviewing the day with his hands locked behind his head.

Then he swore. It was a pointless habit. He returned his arms to his
side and held them rigid, while his head squirmed unpleasantly. Habits
could be broken--and any compulsion he had as a result of whatever had
happened to him was a luxury he couldn't permit himself.

There would be no recovery until he had overcome the taboos and filled
all the gaps in his mind with useful things. Perhaps the Aliens had
already succeeded. They might have decided somehow that he was the only
man who _could_ solve the problem, and had tampered just enough to make
sure he'd fail, while keeping him competent enough to insure that no
other man would replace him.

He yanked his arms down again, and started to turn over. Fifteen
minutes later, he came out of a complete blackout with his hands at the
back of his neck again and a queer feeling that his mind had remained
active, with only his memory of its activities missing. His glance
darted to the door, but it was still locked, and his clothes lay on the
floor where he'd kicked them.

Apparently he hadn't moved from the bed while he'd been short-circuited
from his memory, at least.

He thrust himself up from the bed in disgust, pulled on his clothes,
and headed down the hall, back towards the laboratory. He passed the
cubicle where General Miles should have been sleeping and noticed a
trace of light shining under the door. For a second, he remembered
the man's words--a spy who confessed would be treated as an honorable
prisoner of war.

Only damn it, he wasn't a spy, whatever else he might be. And there was
no time left to find someone else to solve the problem that had been
dumped into his lap. He couldn't turn himself in while that problem
remained a race with death.

Inside his mind was a slowly growing hatred of the Aliens, and he clung
to it tenaciously. They'd denied him his right to be a normal human
being--and while their imposed attitudes made it impossible for him to
understand the absurd conduct of men, he was beginning to realize that
the fault lay with him, and not with the rest of humanity. It was not a
pleasant thought.

Fresh guards had replaced the original pair. They swung in behind him,
and then stopped at the entrance of the laboratory. He'd insisted that
they stay outside, since he wanted no one to watch his experiments with
the lizards. Complete ignorance of events was the only sure protection
against spies.

He headed around the computer by letting his feet guide him, and
reached for the switch. It clicked, just as a voice sounded in front of
him.

"Norden, you damned fool! Leave those lights off!"

But they were already on, showing the tall, unmoving figure of
Armsworth standing before the cage of the lizards with a knife in his
hand.


                                  IV

Norden felt a wave of hate boil up in him, and made no attempt to check
it. As he returned Armsworth's stare his mind reacted to the situation
before he could realize more than a few of the implications.

Obviously, Armsworth was a spy who knew of the work here, and had come
to wreck it. With his rank, it would be easy enough for him to get in.
Also, the man stood there with none of the fear he should have shown on
being discovered, and Norden felt the sick confirmation of his being a
pawn for the Aliens.

But the fact itself gave him some chance. He lifted his arm to the
switch, and then dropped it. "The guards would suspect something if I
cut it off now," he admitted candidly. "Any suggestions?"

"I could kill the lizards, let you discover me, and chase me out to
explode," Armsworth said thoughtfully, without any emotional color to
the suggestion. He shook his head.

"I don't know. It's funny they can't trust you to stall off the Miles
girl and have to send me here. With replacements scarce, I'd hate to
blow up unless it's absolutely necessary."

Then his eyes narrowed in incredulous alarm. "Wait a minute. You
weren't supposed to know my identity."

Norden's hand swept up, hit the light switch. His other arm jerked out
for the big tongs he had noticed. He heard the spy leap, and recoiled
just in time to avoid the rush. His arm came down with the instrument,
and there was a solid thud. When he turned the lights on again,
Armsworth lay on the floor with a gash across his head an inch deep.

For a moment Norden was only aware of his own harsh breathing. Then,
slowly and horribly, the corpse sat up and began hitching along the
floor toward the cage of lizards.

Norden bent, picked up the little cage and swung towards the door.
He took one step forward, stopped abruptly, and bent again. His hand
gripped the collar of the thing on the floor and, straightening, he
heaved it up against the light gravity of the Moon.

The thing sailed across the laboratory, heading toward the rear of the
heavy protogravity generator. Norden cushioned the cage of lizards
against his chest and dropped to the floor in the shelter of the
computer.

There was a blast that nearly ruptured his eardrums and the
accompanying glare of greenish-yellow light burned through his eyelids
into his brain. The floor heaved and shook, while sections of the
curved roof began falling. The air gushed upwards, and the floor jarred
again as the automatic airseal dropped, cutting off other sections.

Norden jumped toward a plainly marked closet, and threw it open. He
yanked down one of the spacesuits stored there for emergency purposes,
thrust the lizard cage inside, closed it, and turned on the oxygen.

Adapted to the thin air of Mars, it seemed likely the animals would
remain alive. He groped about until he located another suit that would
fit, cursed as he found it zippered closed, and finally worked it open.
Once in, he sealed it, and headed toward the personnel lock on the big
emergency airseal.

He got through just as the guards were about to enter in their own
spacesuits, dragging rescue equipment. Miles was with them, waiting
impatiently while Norden slipped his helmet off. "Who was it?" he
demanded.

"Armsworth," Norden told him. "After he passed the fluoroscope test!"

Miles sighed, but there was no surprise. "Damn! I should have had him
checked when he came back from inspecting the other side. They must
have had a spy all ready to make the switch as soon as they got him. Or
maybe the test doesn't mean anything."

The guards had come back. One of them began to report on what they had
seen. Most of the damage had been confined to the roof of the building,
and to the big protogravity generator, which apparently had shielded
the rest of the equipment.

Norden and Pat, who had finally been called, went inside in their suits
to supervise clearing away the debris. Outside, a crew was already
erecting a new roof on the laboratory, using prefab sheets. Aside from
the generator they had never used, nothing irreplaceable had been hurt.
And the two little male lizards were doing well enough. Inside of two
hours the laboratory was back in full operation.

By common consent, Pat and Norden abandoned all idea of sleeping.
Norden started to draw up a list of new tests, and then went back to
the potassium shield. It seemed to produce a very slight quantitative
difference in the reaction of the females. He consulted the vague
speculations in his own works on possible other spectra, and came back.

The trouble was that he wasn't working with any natural phenomenon,
but with life. He grimaced at the twist of his logic, but the sense
remained. Something came into the back of his mind from a phrase in
Hardwick's notes. It teased him, until his mind almost had it, and
then another taboo clamped down on his thoughts.

He fought it out, standing still while Pat stared at him doubtfully.
Twice he could feel himself almost black out, but he tracked the taboo
down in his mind, pursued it into its lair, and strangled it. It died
hard, but left his answer available.

"K-40," he said. His voice was steady, and Pat relaxed, unable to see
the complete fatigue inside him. Disciplining himself seemed to be the
hardest possible task. "Radio-active potassium isotope. It's supposed
to be mixed up somehow with the life processes. Some scientists claim
it's essential to life."

She reached for the phone, and spoke into it briefly. Then there was a
wait, before she handed it over, and a voice came on. "This is General
Dawes at Oak Ridge. Who's calling?"

"William Norden, Project A-sub-zero, Moon Base. I want five pounds of
K-40 up here in four hours. Use my top priority and mark the shipment
for delivery to me only."

There was the usual few seconds of waiting while the message traveled
to Earth, and back. "Five _pounds_?" the voice asked, incredulously.

"Five pounds! And I may want more as fast as it can be gathered."

Pat was on another phone. Before Earth could answer again, there was
a click, and General Miles' voice broke in sharply. "This is Miles,
Dawes. _Give Norden what he wants._"

A sputter of protest began, but it ended abruptly as Miles' voice
reached Earth. The silence was broken by a sigh. "Okay, Norden, we'll
get it to you in four hours somehow."

It arrived in less time, and Norden and Pat began the tricky job of
getting the highly active elements into a container which was both
chemically and radio-actively safe. They clamped it over the cage at
last, and watched the pressure on the female cages.

The results weren't spectacular, but they were unquestionable. And
later, when they had reduced the amount of K-40 to a thin coating, it
still worked. The quantity of potassium made very little difference
beyond a certain minimum.

The effects still weren't good enough. They tried painting various
substances with the chloride of the potassium, with equally good
results and much greater ease of handling. The nitrate was even better
to work with.

But it took them until late that night before they learned that coating
the nitrate over cleaned iron was a major step forward. Until then it
had been all hit and miss, except for vague directional hunches.

Norden looked at Pat, who seemed ready to drop. "Better go back for
some rest," he suggested. She shook her head, but did agree to lie down
while he began re-checking their results to date. Their best efforts
had quieted the excitement of the females by no more than ten percent.

He reduced everything he could to a consistent basis, and added other
formulae which might apply from the incomplete relationship tables
that strove to reconcile the two recognized spectra. Those might also
indicate something about any third spectrum. Either his memory was
coming back or his reading of the books and articles was beginning to
take effect, he was pleased to notice.

Pat worked the computer, which had fortunately suffered only minor
damages, and had been repaired. From the computations, they made the
indicated experiments, and fed the results into the machine. This time,
it gave only seven suggested answers, with a rough weighing of them.
The second one called for one of several organic substances soaked in
potassium ferrocyanide and grounded.

While they waited for the chemistry shed to handle that with due
precautions on the radio-active isotope, they tried the others. One
gave a better than fifty percent reduction, which meant that the
females were only mildly crazy.

"Don't they ever relax?" Pat wondered, unwrapping one of the
sandwiches Miles had ordered sent in to them.

The female sand lizard's libido mattered less than nothing to Norden at
the moment. He was staring at the work he had done in relating hints
and fragments of information with pure hunches to get new facts, and
realizing that he could never have done that, even before the Aliens
had tampered with him. Either he was mysteriously more capable, now
that he'd managed to overcome a few of the taboos in his mind, or
else the loss of so much of his memory had left his thoughts freer to
operate.

"We'll call this the Hardwick spectrum," he decided aloud. "The man was
a crackpot cultist, but he was a genius, all the same. And with this,
we'll pay those damned Aliens back for what they did to him."

"We wouldn't be able to if you hadn't had time to get the males and
yourself into oxygen suits before Armsworth exploded," Pat told him.
"They're the only males left alive, now that Mars has been scoured by
the Aliens."

He swung around in surprise. "I never...."

The phone saved him from finishing. He hadn't had time to get into a
space suit immediately. After the blast he had fumbled around searching
for one. And he'd arrived outside the lock without ever having felt
discomfort from living in a vacuum for _five full minutes_!

His self-satisfaction vanished, and revulsion took its place. He
stared at his body in horror. No human body could have endured such
punishment. But he had taken it without noticing it!

Pat came back at a run. "Come on, Bill. A messenger just arrived from
Earth with five hundred pounds of K-40!"

"Five hundred?" Norden could almost hear again the amazed voice of
General Dawes when he asked for a mere five pounds--a quantity nearly
impossible to secure.

Pat's face confirmed his suspicions. Earth couldn't have made five
hundred pounds so rapidly.

       *       *       *       *       *

They found the guards already waiting to take them to where Miles
was, and followed them down to the entrance of the explosion testing
chamber. Miles was smiling and chatting with a man who appeared to be
a perfectly normal rocket pilot, and who seemed bored until he saw
Norden. He consulted a picture on some kind of tape recording and
stepped forward.

"I have orders to deliver the K-40 to you, Dr. Norden," the pilot said.
"But it's pretty bulky in its containers. If you'll come out to the
ship and okay it...."

Miles cut in blandly. "I've been explaining the new regulations, Dr.
Norden." He winked slightly, with a faint motion toward the chamber.

"Go ahead and clear through," Norden told the pilot. "I'll wait, and
then we can look at your cargo. It's a damned nuisance having to hold
things up while everyone is X-rayed. But we've new regulations now." He
caught Miles' look of approval, and he knew he'd reacted correctly.

The pilot shrugged. "Why not? Let me know if you find any dangerous
diseases." He chuckled, and stepped through the entrance, and out
toward the fluoroscope set-up.

The picture on the screen was satisfactory and the guards started to
relax beside the slits where their guns projected into the chamber.
Miles glanced at them, and his voice was urgent, commanding. "_Shoot to
miss. And keep getting closer._"

Another screen showed the pilot turning to leave, just as the first
bullet splintered the floor a yard from his boots. He jumped back with
a terrified gesture. Another bullet came closer, and a third barely
missed him. Shock hit his face, and vanished as he turned into a bright
splash of greenish-yellow light.

"They over-estimated our production and under-estimated our ability
to bluff," Miles said. "Good shooting, men. I'm glad he decided he'd
failed the test before you had to shave it closer."

Norden stood staring at the blasted area and back toward the
screen that had shown the image of a normal human standing before a
fluoroscope. Breathing vacuum for five minutes hadn't hit him as hard.
Subconsciously, he'd counted on the fluoroscopic evidence--and it had
proved to be a lie.

"He couldn't have been an Alien with that kind of a skeleton!" he
whispered.

Miles shook his head. "He wasn't. As near as our cyberneticists could
gather, he was some kind of a robot, designed to mix with us. We left
automatic televisors on Mars to catch a few telephotos of the Aliens,
and they look a little like octopi on stubby legs. Nothing could make
them look human."

"But a robot with a human skeleton?" Pat asked.

"It's possible, with enough advanced development. Hide the metal works
in the so-called bones and skull, and shape everything else to the
right form and transparency. Probably the first ones we caught were
meant to mislead us. Hughes swears that any race capable of developing
such an advanced cybernetic brain could handle the rest--down to
letting him get his energy out of our food."

Miles' face was more fatigued than ever, but he found enough strength
for a smile. "Thanks for playing along with me, Bill. Now get back to
work, if you can stand it. The chem lab delivered your stuff while you
were coming here."

The stuff from the chemists looked like wool, impregnated with the K-40
salt. Pat slashed off a yard of the coarse cloth and draped it around
the cage, after a quick check with the Geiger-Mueller counter. She
formed a rope of it and connected the cage-cover to the nearest pipe.

And the images of the females in the screens were suddenly still, as
if all of them had gone to sleep at once. Pat yanked the cover off and
instantly the females were dashing at the gates of their cages again.

Pat let out a yell and reached for the phone. Norden tried to echo her
enthusiasm, but there was no resiliency left in him. He stared at the
answer to their problems, while part of his mind estimated that the
pilots could stand the radioactivity from suits of such cloth long
enough to accomplish their purpose, if an undersuit of lead-cloth could
be worn also.

But the rest of his mind was in his own private hell. _Robot_, it
shouted at him--_robot and spy!_ It was plain enough now that his
periods of "relaxation" and review of the day's events had been a
mechanism for leaking information to the Aliens. His unexpected and
rebellious attempt to end it had been the signal to send Armsworth
against the male lizards. Hands-behind-the-head-Norden, he
thought--the robot too dumb to recognize the working of an automatic
transmitter switch.

He fondled the cloth cover slowly, tasting the anticipation of revenge.
The Aliens had taken a man named William Jon Norden from a lonely
asteroid, and had drained him of his life history and knowledge. They'd
built a poor dupe of a robot, and had sent it out to spy for them, and
to believe for a while that it was human and alive. Now let them feel
the defeat they'd earned when they built their robot too close to the
original.

Then he considered the thin thread on which his hopes rested. He had
something that stopped some form of energy from being detected by the
lizards--an unknown band-width of an unknown spectrum which might not
even be the right one.

He swung around to check Pat's call, but it was too late. The word had
already spread, judging by the whoops or rejoicing coming from beyond
the laboratory.


                                   V

Norden broke away from the men who refused to listen to his warnings
as quickly as possible. Pat had already gone to her bunk, worn out
completely by the brief burst of hope, and he headed for his own
cubicle. There was no physical fatigue--how could there be in a robot?
But his mind was dulled with too many shocks. He dropped to the bunk,
and his arms came up automatically.

He forced them down, and this time he was ready when his brain tried to
black out on him. The compulsions that acted on him to make him pass on
his information to the Aliens were partly under his control.

He managed to sidetrack his thoughts before blacking out, and to keep
his arms down. He lay there, cursing himself and the things which had
created him, fighting his battle silently, until he knew he had won.

His legs were unsteady when he finally stood up. The effort of will
had shocked even his motor control impulses, but the damage was not
permanent, and by the time he passed Miles' darkened doorway, he was
moving smoothly enough again. He saw surprised looks exchanged by his
guards as they followed him back to the laboratory.

"You might as well come in," he told them. "I'll be here all night, and
there's nothing secret about my work now. I think there's a deck of
cards in the desk over there."

One of them looked and came back, holding the deck and grinning.
"Thanks, Doc," he said. "You're all right."

For a second, Norden experienced a warming glow as he turned into his
office. He could find some acceptance among men now. Then he grimaced
bitterly, as he realized what they'd think of him if they knew the
truth about him. It was one thing to ape humanity, quite another to
belong.

The article on speculative spectra by the Japanese scientist was still
on his desk, and he began poring over it. Almost at once, his mind
swerved away on a flight of curiosity about the card game the men had
been playing. He pulled it back, and his imagination started in on
hatred of the Aliens.

He fought against that too, tempting as it was. He'd licked the
compulsion to communicate with them in two hours. There was hope that
he could lick the taboo against investigating into a forbidden field.
The fact that it was forbidden made it doubly worth studying.

Bit by bit he traced down the mathematics, but in the end the taboo
threw him. It required all the effort he could bring to the problem to
follow the tricky formulae, and it couldn't be done while fighting the
treachery of his own mind. He gave up in disgust, and turned to the
computer.

He'd seen Pat use it often enough, and apparently his robot mind
was good at memorizing. He searched through the available tapes of
information until he came to one that covered the more vital aspects of
Einstein's unified field theory.

He fed it in, and began adding the spectra relation data from the
books, carefully storing them in the memory circuits of the machine.
The mathematics of the article went in next. He made sure the material
they had used to locate the screen was still active, and brought it up
to date.

Finally he set the machine to deriving all possible extensions of the
mathematics he couldn't handle himself.

When that was finished, there was no longer any need to worry about the
taboo. The computer had done what he had failed to do, and more. He
stared at the sheaf of papers. The assembled material would save years
of work on extraspectral radiation. And his suspicion that magnetism
was the vital link seemed to be confirmed. It appeared to be something
of a universal transformer, when properly handled.

But the machine couldn't tell him what section of the Hardwick spectrum
involved life. The field used by the lizards to locate each other lay
well up in it, in a band relationship somewhat analogous to the X-rays
of the normal spectrum. But if that failed, there was no clue to what
might work.

In any new field, one fresh fact could open up tremendous stores
of knowledge--but there would always be even greater ones awaiting
discovery.

He put in a call to the library for more material on Janiekowski's
work with the lizards, and was told that they'd have to secure a tape
from Earth. Earth promised a ship with the tape, and other material
he'd requested within three hours. There was no questioning of his
priorities this time.

Then he glanced at the clock, and was shocked to find it already past
noon. He got up impatiently, heading toward the lunch room. It was
strange that Pat had failed to join him.

He found her and Miles searching for him in the cafeteria, and one look
was enough. Miles motioned Norden to follow him, and led the way to his
office. Once there, he closed the door, and threw the decoded dispatches
down for Norden to see.

"The Aliens have narrowed the invasion area to ten million miles from
Earth," he said wearily. "We've been holding out by a clever tactical
subterfuge. Send out a hundred ships near each other, and the Aliens
can't handle them all at once. If we're lucky, and spot the first
torpedoes, we can trace them back and a few ships may survive long
enough to send visual, pattern-seeking atomic torpedoes toward the
Alien ship.

"But we can't get closer than a few hundred thousand miles with any
life aboard a ship, because the radiation--or whatever it is they
use--is fatal so long as they can detect us. You can see why Command
rushed through all the screen suits they could, and struck this
morning. They had to."

Norden picked up the dispatches, and scanned them grimly. Seven hundred
pilots out of twice that many thousand had been screened. A third of
the total number had returned--but none of the spared ships had been
theoretically protected.

The Aliens had apparently not only spotted all of the protected ships,
but had concentrated their torpedo fire on them. The experiment was a
complete failure!

There was no use in reminding Miles that he'd tried to warn him. Earth
hadn't been able to heed such warnings. He handed the papers back, his
mind tormented by a picture of seven hundred men--men probably like the
guards who'd called him all right--who had lost their marginal chance
to live because a robot had failed. It was nonsense, his mind told him.
Soldiers were meant to die. But the picture remained.

"So what happens to me now?" he asked.

"You'll try again, of course," Miles answered, apparently surprised
at the question. "At least the fact that they worked that hard to
eliminate the ships with the screen indicates you're on the right
track."

Norden stared at him despairfully. "It's like tracing a single drop
of water in the ocean--or looking for a trace of life that can be
detected for millions of miles when you're in the middle of hordes
of living creatures. I've been working on that already. And the only
reason we _could_ detect and screen the lizard signals was because they
were unique.

"Hardwick was right about that, too. You have to look for life forces
where they're scarce. I need isolation from people, animals--even from
germs and viruses, probably."

Pat gestured to a map on the wall. "There are the mine installations on
the other side of the Moon. Would they do?"

He had no idea, but it was the best he could hope for. He nodded
slowly, and she turned towards the door.

"Then what are we waiting for?" she asked. "We've got too little time
now."

"You're not going, Pat," he told her. "Nobody is. I need isolation from
life, remember! Besides, if there's any means of communication between
here and there, I'll need you here to work the communicator."

There was a television link that was still useful, as a quick check
showed. And there were ships to carry as much equipment as he needed,
including two rabbits, and a male and female sand lizard in little
airtight cages where oxygen could be supplied from tanks. He had no
idea of what he might need, and had to take everything he could
imagine as being useful.


                                  VI

Three hours later, he stood alone in the building that had served as
a barracks for a mine crew. He watched the rockets leave, and began
opening the airlocks to space. Any bacteria left by the former men
would quickly perish, he felt sure. But he had to be thorough.

He had no hope of success yet. He might be keeping a death watch over
the human race as the Aliens moved in--or a life watch, since he was
seeking life while they were intent on ending it. But he, at least, was
no living thing, and the life detectors of the Aliens should miss him.
Somehow, he'd learn enough to seek vengeance among them.

They'd made a mistake in creating him with all the ability of the
original William Norden, and the thinking speed of a robot. They'd made
a bigger mistake in assuming that a robot was only a robot, and that
orders in the form of compulsions would be followed without question.

For their mistakes, they'd pay. He had twenty-four hours out of each
day for work, and, until they caught him, to learn their further
weaknesses.

He flooded the front entrance, where the television link to Moon base
stood, with air to make speech possible, and rigged up a flexible seal
to the rest of the building.

Janiekowski had dissected countless sand lizards, and the pictures were
included in the reel of tape from Earth. He studied them, digging into
what the calculator had supplied about radiation, and its behavior in
the third spectrum. He found, as he had expected, that a tiny bit of
radio-active material lay at the base of the microscopic receptor in
the female, and that a similar mechanism was to be found in the organ
which the male used to generate the force.

There was a tiny helix of super-fine, wirelike construction around
the radio-active material, but he had no idea of what the conductor
was composed, or how the animals generated the faint currents of
electricity they'd need. He was only sure the helix was a tiny
electromagnet.

He built a model as best he could, and tried to find some indication
that it picked up a signal from the male. Finally he was forced to
anesthetize the female and remove her receptor for examination under
the portable electron microscope.

It took eleven tries before he was able to detect anything of
importance. Then the result surprised him. The faint, almost invisible
glow from the radio-active disintegration in his device abruptly faded.
He had been expecting it to increase, but whatever force the male
broadcast seemingly acted to decrease the "unchangeable" rate of decay
of a bit of K-40.

He called Pat, asking for information. Her face was haggard with worry,
and her anxiety to remain constantly vigilant and alert. She wrote down
his questions, and cut off without wasting time. Half an hour later,
she called back.

"You're right. Uranium-bearing ores from far out in space contain
much less uranium in proportion to lead than similar ores on Earth.
Geologists say it's because those space-borne rocks are older, and
cosmic radiation acts on them more continuously."

"They're wrong," he said flatly. "It's because radioactivity is
inhibited by the life processes. I don't know how. But I do know I need
that data fed into the computer."

It meant they'd have to revise all of their figures about the age of
the Earth upwards. Since the beginning of life on Earth and Mars, no
radio-active half-life had been natural. Probably the rate of decay had
varied slightly with each century, as the amount of life changed.

He fed her a list of calculations, and waited while the machine ground
out its answers. Pat came back to the screen while it worked on
automatically.

"They're bombing the base now," she reported dully. "We've been able
to miss being hit by keeping a cover of volunteers up to attract the
seeking units before they reach us. And the Aliens are within three
million miles. We can't hold out much longer."

"Don't forget your optimism," he said. He'd meant it for reassurance,
but she stared back as if he'd slapped her. "I mean your computer
calculations on victory for Earth. How come they moved in so quickly?"

"It's been three days," she told him. "Don't you know how long you've
been out there?"

He hadn't kept track. The cluck of the computer ending its work
interrupted them, and she held the results up to the screen for him to
copy with the camera at his end.

He studied the formulae for long, wasted minutes before he could accept
them. Then he went on to other work.

There was no shield possible for any object bigger than about twice the
size of the cage they had used. There could never be any way to protect
a man from the Aliens.

It was to be a death watch he kept, apparently. And Pat must have known
it when she saw the formulae, since she had picked up sufficient basic
knowledge to read it.

He stood staring up at the space above him, letting the hate harden
inside him, while he pictured the base in the hands of the invaders!
Humans were beyond saving, according to the figures he had now. But it
was still not too late for vengeance.

This time he deliberately sought for a taboo in his mind to discourage
thought along hindering lines. The forbidden topic was the question of
why the Aliens had to exterminate life as they advanced. He wrestled
with it briefly, rejoicing in the knowledge that he seemed to be
gaining ease in overcoming the compulsory behavior which had been
imposed on him.

Life must be poison to the Aliens! Probably it was for that reason that
they had been able to detect it in the first place. And they could
never rest until it was wiped out to the last living cell. He glanced
at his formulae again, and nodded. If their existence were somehow
based on the breakdown of radio-active isotopes, and if protoplasmic
life slowed up that process, then they _had_ to exterminate it.

How? He asked it automatically, remembering the force they used
to sterilize space before them. And that had an answer, too. Even
protoplasmic life apparently needed a tiny, incredibly small amount of
radioactivity to function. Blast enough of the raw life-force against
it, and all nuclear breakdown would stop--and with the stopping of
that, there would be no life.

It was logical that the weapon of the Aliens should be the one thing
which they themselves feared most.

Tiny--incredibly weak--as the energy of those life forces were, they
could do more in their inhibiting of the great force of nuclear
readjustment than ten million atomic bombs!

He drew up his plans this time with sureness. He was no longer amazed
at the progress he'd made in understanding extraspectral phenomena.
It might very well represent the work of generations of scientists,
but he was a robot designed to understand human science, even from the
few smatterings the Aliens had been able to learn before he had been
created.

He finished the designs, wrote down the proper formulae, and stacked
the paper in front of the television pick-up, pressing the call button.
Without waiting for an answer, he went back into the workshop, and
began assembling the tiny, radio-active strontium batteries and tubes
of protein plastic, wound with layers of iron wire. He had enough for
what he needed.

The device was set to work both as a detector and a generator of the
radiation involved. He tuned one, setting it to receive. It took a few
minutes to replace the antenna of the small radar set with the new
device, and he forced himself to work faster by the sheer drive of his
will.

Then he stepped aside, letting mechanism revolve on the antenna
mount. He began increasing the current that controlled the degree of
electromagnetism in the wire which served to tune the device.

A pip appeared on the screen, pointing toward the cage where the
male and crippled female lay peacefully together. Norden raised the
frequency until another pip appeared, this time pointing to the
rabbits. He adjusted it for maximum brightness. In the section which
should cover the direction of Moon base below him, a brilliant glow
sprang up, indicating radiation that cut straight through all the
layers of the Moon. He adjusted the instrument again.

He found the exact frequency, and the whole screen suddenly blazed,
blanked out by overloading of the amplifier. Apparently all life of
terrestrial origin radiated at the same frequency. He cranked up the
control, expecting nothing more. Then he bent sharply forward as other
pips appeared, indicating objects far out in space!

The Aliens also radiated in the same spectrum--but at such an
incredibly high frequency that no atomic nucleus was small enough to be
affected by the radiation.

As Norden watched, the central pip suddenly began to grow brighter,
holding its position in a way that indicated a straight descent toward
his detector! Terror struck at his nerves.

Obviously the Aliens had detectors for every frequency, and his
detector was just crude enough to radiate a faint trace of its own.
He'd been located, and the exterminating force was on the way.


                                  VII

Norden cursed his own stupidity, and estimated the time it would
take. If they decided to come in, and spray the area with their own
force, or to capture it, he had several minutes. If they sent one of
their super-speed torpedoes, he was on borrowed time. His mind raced
furiously.

With a few minutes to spare, he could tune the tube he'd designed as a
weapon, and spray them with that. Its straight-line efficiency would
insure that no dangerous amount of its radiation would reach the men
two thousand miles away. Vengeance was his for the taking.

He reached for the other tube, hesitated, and picked up a piece of
paper and a pencil. The men at the base had the working plans of his
device by now. They had to be warned how dangerous it would be not to
make absolutely sure that their radiation generators and detectors
couldn't spill dangerous radiation at random. Also that the Aliens
could detect an inefficient search ray.

Norden headed for the flexible seal at a full run, while his steady
hands pencilled the final information on the radiation frequencies
needed. He broke through into the air of the entrance, yanked the
diagrams off the pick-up rack, and snapped in the new instructions. He
turned with a single motion, and headed for the workroom again. And
stopped!

Beyond the entrance, the gleaming fins of a rocket were visible. And
the red light on the airlock indicated someone was coming through.
As his eyes focussed, he saw the inner lock open, and Miles and Pat
emerged in the red glare.

They started to shout something, but he cut them off. "For God's sake,
stay here. There's no air beyond. Alien ship!"

He jumped through the seal. His hands swept up the tube that was to
be a weapon, and his eyes darted to the screen. The pip was bigger
now, and at maximum brightness. The Alien ship must be only tens of
thousands of miles above, braking down to attack with deadly precision.

Less than a hundred feet away, the two humans waited, at the mercy of
any energy that might spill from his weapon! He would have to score
with a perfect piece of marksmanship, with all the radiation directed
in a straight line.

The formulae of its propagation seemed like an endless belt in his
mind. He tightened the helix of wire about the radio-active lode,
trying to be sure they were even. With time, there were a number of
things he might have done, but he had no time to spare. He might harm
Miles and Pat--but the Alien beam would leave nothing to chance.

The thought of Miles and Pat jolted through his mind in a delayed
reaction. They'd seen him come into this airless space without a
helmet. They knew now he wasn't human! Discovered! _Explode the ..._

"No!" he shouted silently into the airless room. He had to get the
Alien first!

He had no idea how much time he had left as he snapped a flashlight
battery into place, and tried to line the weapon into resonance with
the detector settings. He lifted his eyes, to stare up through the open
roof of the building. He knew there should be a faint black dot in the
sky, but he couldn't see it against the blackness of space.

He lifted the weapon, pointed it toward where the Aliens should be, and
depressed the little trigger, moving the rheostat back and forth to be
sure he had the lethal frequency well covered.

He felt a tremor on the floor beside him, and his eyes caught a glimpse
of Pat at his side before he could force his gaze toward space again.
She was shouting something inside her helmet.

Then he caught the first visible sign of the Alien ship, already
within miles of the building, and big enough to show in the side-light
of the sun. It came rushing down in an unchecked plunge, apparently
heading straight for him! He strained his eyes, tracing its path. Then
he relaxed. It was moving sideways and would land a mile away. _The
weapon had worked._ No ship would have risked such speed so near the
surface if the pilot had been alive.

He gripped Pat by the shoulder, and dragged her to the floor, away from
the threat of falling debris. There was no sound, but a tremendous
jolt rocked the floor of the building, and for a terror-fraught moment
the ground seemed to dance madly. A shaft of greenish-yellow radiance
merged with a glaring red that lit up the sky for miles. The ship had
struck at a terrific speed--fast enough to reduce everything inside it
to a pulp. The instant everything was quiet, Norden sprang to his feet.

_Now! There is no time to be lost!_

He caught the thought in time. He couldn't let himself explode in
the workroom. He had to get outside, away from the two humans. The
compulsion squeezed and writhed in his mind, and he could not throw it
off. It was tenfold as strong as the previous commands--and the need to
overcome it a hundred times as great.

He stumbled toward the seal as Pat stood by. His body slipped through
the seal, and he almost bumped into Miles, who was apparently waiting
for him. Norden had no spare effort for speech or thought. He headed
dumbly for the airlock, determined to get outside as quickly as
possible.

"Norden!" The general had grabbed his arm, and was following him.
"Norden, if you go out there, I'm going with you. Whatever happens will
happen to me, too. _You've got to listen!_"

He tried to force his way ahead, shaking his arm to free it. The other
arm was also carrying a dead weight, and he could see Pat's face close
to his own.

She was screaming at him. "Bill! Bill, you must listen! We knew it all
along! We _knew_ you were a robot! It doesn't matter. If you explode,
you'll take us with you!"

He hit the lock in savage desperation and the words froze meaninglessly
in his ears as he held back the driving urge until he could escape from
them.

Miles clung grimly. "It's the Aliens, Bill! They want you to explode.
The damned Aliens who want to kill you! Do you love them so much you'll
kill us all? Or do you hate them?"

Slowly it penetrated the red haze of torment in his mind. The Aliens
wanted to kill him. They'd played with him, had turned him into a
monster to do their malicious bidding. They'd given him nothing in
return. And now they wanted everything. His own life, worthless though
it might be--and the life of his friends.

The hate washed through him--the cold, hard hate that had a greater
strength for its very lack of endocrine instability.

"I'm all right," he said slowly. "You're safe. You can go back to the
base."

Miles stared at him with a warm and friendly understanding. "We really
did know about you, Bill," he said. "That business about your being
the only undetected human on the asteroid looked suspicious, and the
psychologists weren't fooled. We were gambling on a chance to get some
information on the Aliens' detector out of you before you could do
anything dangerous.

"Hardwick was the only man who could have known enough to have any
chance. With him dead, we had to hope they'd give you information
enough to act in his place. Pat volunteered to watch you. And we had
ultra-violet cameras in every room where you ever were, watching you
every second."

He paused, but Norden could think of nothing to say. He looked at Pat
for confirmation, and she nodded. "We set the whole thing up for you,
Bill. But we found we were wrong. The Aliens had done too good a job on
you for their own good. They made you too human--so human that you had
to begin thinking _our_ way. After that business with Armsworth, we
stopped worrying."

"But you came out here ..." he began.

"Not to spy on you, Bill," Miles told him. "Earth's evacuating the
Moon, now that you found us weapons to handle the Aliens. We're needed
to supervise things back at the factories. Pat and I just came to pick
you up, when you wouldn't answer your calls. We're taking you home."

He stared at them silently, and there was a complex of feelings in his
mind that made thinking almost impossible. Bitterness was heavier than
anything else.

"That's fine for someone who won't hate an enemy--though you're quick
enough to employ hate when it's useful." He looked at Miles steadily.
"What about the rest of the world? Will they welcome a bomb-carrying
robot monster as a friend?" Bill Norden wanted to know.

Miles put his hands on Norden's shoulders, while Pat went back into the
workroom. "Sit down on the desk, Bill," he urged. "The only people who
know are the two of us, and Jim--the psychologist who predicted exactly
how you'd react from the beginning. He also gave you a test that
first day that involved our top-grade X-ray machine--not one of those
fluoroscopic toys. It's a good thing you've got your brains all through
you, because when I get done, you'll be literally empty-headed."

Pat came back with a collection of equipment. Norden stared, trying to
sit up. "You must be insane. Do you want to be killed if I blow. Are
all humans crazy?"

Miles tightened his grip on Norden's shoulder. "Hold still. It
shouldn't hurt. We're going to leave the communication gadget where it
is, as it may be useful, later. But that bomb must come out." He smiled
abruptly. "As to humans--well, you should know."


                                 VIII

Three days later Bill Norden took his hands from the back of his neck,
and sat up. He joined Miles and Pat at the screen of the big life-force
"radar." Far out in space, a group of swiftly moving objects were
drawing together, according to the pips that traced their course. They
formed into clusters and began heading outwards.

The pips grew dimmer almost instantly, though they should have lost
only half their brightness after a billion miles of traveling.

"Obviously faster than light, and heading straight toward Sirius,"
Miles said slowly. "The poor devils! Until some darned fool from Earth
goes there one day to try to make peace with them, they're going to
live every hour of their lives in the horrible certainty that we can
wipe them out whenever we choose--and that the best their race could
do was a total failure. They'll probably have sunk back to being
scared, unhappy savages before we reach them."

Norden thought of the charts that had been shown him while he lay in
the communicating position. Earth had enough life-force projectors to
sweep the skies with lethal radiation already, and she had just begun
to tool up.

The Aliens had guessed wrongly about every step--they'd followed a
logical pattern against a race that defied logic.

And somehow, his hatred of them was gone. "You'll have the superlight
drive next year, probably," he guessed. "There are enough of their
ships out there now with Aliens who died before they could set off
their bombs for you to figure that out. Earth will be sending a ship
there before they can revert to complete savagery."

"And I suppose you want to be on it?" Pat asked. She looked at her
father, smiling thoughtfully as he grinned in answer to her lifted
eyebrow. "I imagine the three of us could swing permission, at that."

Norden nodded. He'd planned it all out. He'd have to go back to
university work, pretending to explore the new trails of science that
had opened with the discovery of Hardwick's spectrum. The formulae he'd
developed had been destroyed, but he could always remember enough to
keep up with the eager young men who would go plunging into the field.

Maybe, that way, by the time the probable levels of telepathy and other
psi-phenomenon had been discovered, the world would be ready for them.
He had no intention of acting as a super-brain, however well equipped
he might be. With the emergency over, the human race could discover
enough by itself.

Miles and his daughter would be busy with the long and difficult job of
trying to re-settle the planets that the Aliens had despoiled. But all
three of them would be ready when the first ship capable of reaching
the stars had been built.

Norden drew himself up.

"Yes," he said. "Yes, I guess I want to be on it. I helped teach the
Aliens enough about human beings as enemies. Now I'd like to teach them
about us as friends."





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LIFE WATCH ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


